



Internet Area Working Group                                     G. White
Internet-Draft                                                 CableLabs
Intended status: Informational                              I. Johansson
Expires: 4 April 2026                                           Ericsson
                                                                  D. Das
                                                                   Intel
                                                          1 October 2025


         Proposal for Updates to Guidance on Packet Reordering
                 draft-white-intarea-reordering-latest

Abstract

   Several link technology standards mandate that equipment guarantee
   in-order delivery of layer 2 frames, apparently due to a belief that
   this is required by higher layer protocols.  In addition, certain
   link types can introduce out-of-order arrivals at the end of the
   layer 2 link, which the receiving equipment is required to rectify by
   delaying higher sequenced frames until all lower sequenced frames can
   be delivered or are deemed lost.  The delaying of higher sequenced
   frames is generally done without any knowledge of the higher layer
   protocols in use, let alone any knowledge of higher layer protocol
   contexts (e.g. TCP connections) in the case that the layer 2 link is
   carrying a multiplex of such contexts.  It could, for example, be the
   case that all of the higher sequenced frames being delayed are
   carrying packets for different layer 4 contexts than a single lower-
   sequenced frame that triggered the delay.  The result is that this
   "resequencing" operation can introduce delays that result in
   degradation of performance rather than improving it.  Moreover,
   modern, performant TCP and QUIC implementations support features that
   significantly improve their tolerance to out-of-order delivery.

   This draft is intended to promote an analysis and discussion of the
   sensitivity of modern IETF protocols to out-of-order delivery, and to
   potentially develop new information for layer 2 technology standards
   regarding the need to assure in-order delivery to support IETF
   protocols.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on 4 April 2026.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2025 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents (https://trustee.ietf.org/
   license-info) in effect on the date of publication of this document.
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.  Code Components
   extracted from this document must include Revised BSD License text as
   described in Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are
   provided without warranty as described in the Revised BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction
   2.  Terminology
   3.  Proposed Updates to RFC3819 Guidance on Packet Reordering
   4.  Reordering in L2 Links
     4.1.  Multi-Link Aggregation
     4.2.  Layer 2 Retransmissions
   5.  Resequencing in L2 Standards
     5.1.  LTE/5G
     5.2.  Wi-Fi
     5.3.  DOCSIS
   6.  IANA Considerations
   7.  Security Considerations
   8.  References
     8.1.  Informative References
   Acknowledgements
   Contributors
   Authors' Addresses

1.  Introduction

   Section 15 of [RFC3819] provides advice to Internet subnetwork
   designers regarding packet reordering.  The advice seems reasonable:
   "try to avoid packet reordering whenever possible, but not if doing
   so compromises efficiency, impairs reliability, or increases average
   packet delay."  However, along with this guidance come a couple of
   warnings that appear to have driven subnetwork designers towards
   assuring in-order delivery even if efficiency is impaired or average
   packet delay is increased.  These warnings relate to the potential
   performance cost for TCP (as it was then defined) that arises due to
   out-of-order arrivals, and to the fact that out-of-order delivery
   would cause problems for "every header compression scheme currently
   standardized for the Internet."

   The text of [RFC3819] does mention that research on improving TCP
   behavior in the face of packet reordering was underway.  In the
   intervening 20+ years, that research has resulted in the definition
   of RACK [RFC8985] which significantly reduces TCP's sensitivity to
   out-of-order arrivals.  In addition, Section 6.1 of [RFC9002]
   discusses the usefulness of implementing similar mechanisms in QUIC,
   and provides the protocol tools to do so.  The result is that having
   the link-layer delay packets to provide them in-order to the
   transport layer was helpful multiple decades ago when TCP
   implementations had more naive algorithms and were very resource-
   constrained.  Given how modern implementations work, this
   "resequencing" at the link-layer is almost always harmful.  Modern
   TCP and QUIC stacks can handle reordering well, thanks to both
   protocol features and implementations having more memory to work
   with.  For these implementations, the delay induced by L2
   resequencing will generally cause more harm than good.  Furthermore,
   one of the biggest motivators for QUIC was to break head-of-line
   blocking and allow out-of-order delivery to the application layer.
   At this point we have large bodies of data showing that this improves
   real-world performance.  Moreover, older implementations of TCP that
   don't implement RACK don't fail in the presence of some out-of-order
   packets.  They may see reduced performance, but they do have the
   ability to correctly handle the receipt of packets out of order.

   At the time of publication of [RFC3819], the "ROHC" header
   compression framework defined in [RFC3095] stated an operating
   assumption that the network would provide in-order delivery.  This
   assumption is discussed in detail in [RFC4224], which provides
   guidance on implementing ROHC over channels that can reorder header-
   compressed packets, and explains different ways of implementing the
   profiles found in [RFC3095] over reordering channels.  Subsequent to
   the publication of [RFC3819] the issue of reordering intolerance by
   ROHC was addressed by the development of ROHCv2 [RFC5225], which
   lists tolerance to reordering as one of its significant improvements
   over ROHC.

   There may be other protocols or protocol implementations that are
   sensitive to reordering to some degree.  For instance, Section 4.1 of
   [RFC2983] discusses IPSec [RFC2401] and L2TP [RFC2661] as being
   sensitive to packet reordering.

   The current situation seems to be that several layer 2 technologies
   implement resequencing functions that increase cost and complexity of
   equipment, and may in many cases degrade network performance rather
   than improving it.  Any benefits of resequencing may be primarily
   limited to older protocol implementations e.g. maintaining the
   performance of older TCP implementations that are no longer widely
   used and may not be particularly performant by modern standards.

2.  Terminology

   In this document, we adopt the following terminology.

   Reordering:
      The process where the packet/frame sequence is made out-of-order
      from the originally transmitted order.

   Resequencing:
      The process where an out-of-order packet/frame sequence is
      returned to the originally transmitted order.

3.  Proposed Updates to RFC3819 Guidance on Packet Reordering

   This draft proposes to replace the contents of Section 15 of
   [RFC3819] with the following text.

   The Internet architecture does not guarantee that packets will arrive
   in the same order in which they were originally transmitted;
   transport protocols must take this into account.

   An earlier definition of TCP [RFC2581][RFC3517][RFC5681][RFC6675]
   defined the "fast retransmit" algorithm, which recommended that a TCP
   receiver send an immediate duplicate ACK when an out-of-order segment
   arrives, and it recommended that the TCP sender use the arrival of 3
   duplicate ACKs as an indication that a segment has been lost.  This
   loss determination triggers a retransmission and a reduction of the
   congestion window.  In the presence of packet reordering, this
   duplicate-ACK-based loss detection mechanism can incorrectly deem a
   packet lost, and thus trigger a spurious retransmission and an
   unnecessary congestion window reduction, both of which can negatively
   impact the performance of the connection.  Thus, one outcome of the
   implementation and deployment of the fast retransmit algorithm is
   that TCPs became significantly more sensitive to network reordering.

   A more recent update to TCP [RFC8985] addresses this sensitivity by
   performing loss detection via time-based inferences derived from the
   ACK feedback, rather than using duplicate ACKs.  In addition,
   Section 6.1 of [RFC9002] discusses the usefulness of implementing
   similar mechanisms in QUIC, and provides the protocol tools to do so.
   Implementations of these time-based loss detection methods have now
   been widely deployed.

   [BPS99] cites reasons why it may undesirable to eliminate reordering.
   There are situations where average packet latency can be reduced,
   link efficiency can be increased, and/or reliability can be improved
   if reordering is permitted.  Examples include certain high speed
   switches within the Internet backbone and the parallel links used
   over many Internet paths for load splitting and redundancy.

   Nonetheless, there may exist implementations of network protocols
   that do not work well in the presence of a significant amount of
   packet reordering.

   This suggests that subnetwork implementers should try to avoid packet
   reordering when possible, but not if doing so compromises efficiency,
   impairs reliability, or increases average packet delay.

4.  Reordering in L2 Links

   In current L2 link technologies, frame reordering comes from two
   primary sources: multi-link aggregation and layer-2 retransmission.

4.1.  Multi-Link Aggregation

   Some link technologies support the aggregation (within L2) of
   multiple links between a pair of nodes for the purpose of increasing
   the total capacity of the link.  In some cases the individual links
   within the aggregation could have different capacities and/or
   latencies from one another.  When this is the case, the frame
   reception order can differ from the frame transmission order.

4.2.  Layer 2 Retransmissions

   Some link technologies (particularly wireless), are subject to noise
   and interference that would result in an unacceptably high frame
   error rate if it were not corrected.  These links commonly implement
   a method of acknowledgement and retransmission of lost frames,
   referred to as Automatic Repeat Request (ARQ).  When a frame loss
   affects one or more frames within a transmission, and the frame(s) at
   the end are unaffected, the retransmitted frames will arrive out of
   sequence from the original ordering.

5.  Resequencing in L2 Standards

   This section discusses functions and requirements for resequencing in
   exising layer 2 standards.

5.1.  LTE/5G

   Packet reordering can occur on both the MAC and the RLC layer in LTE
   and 5G systems.  Packet resequencing occurs on the PDCP layer.

   On the MAC layer: An RLC packet data unit (RLC-PDU) is transmitted in
   one of up to 16 Hybrid ARQ processes on the MAC layer.  This avoids
   the stop and wait for one transmission to succed before a new
   transmission can begin.  Transmission on the MAC layer can however
   have a high block error rate (BLER), 10% or more is common especially
   when the traffic pattern and radio channel varies.  Each
   retransmission adds a few milliseconds extra delay.

   This results in that packets are delivered out of order up to the RLC
   layer on the receiver side because some transmissions on the MAC
   layer may succeed in one transmission attempt while other
   transmissions may need several attepts, up to some given limit given
   by system configuration.

   HARQ failure is triggered when the max number of retransmissions is
   reached.

   On the RLC Layer: The RLC layer is configured in two typical ways.

   *  RLC Unacknowledged mode (RLC-UM): Is typically used for VoIP
      services a.k.a VoLTE (Voice over LTE) or VoNR (Voice over NR) but
      can also be used for the transmission of low latency video.  Data
      blocks are not retransmitted in this mode.

   *  RLC Acknowledged mode (RLC-AM): Is typically used for normal
      internet traffic, a.k.a Mobile Broadband (MBB).  Retransmissions
      on this layer are less common than retransmissions on the MAC
      layer and they occur when HARQ failure is triggered on the MAC
      layer, or in the case that the MAC layer erroneously decodes a
      NACK as an ACK.  Retransmission on the RLC layer causes 10s of
      milliseconds on extra delay, depending on how timers are
      configured.

   Besides the causes for packet reordering listed above, packet
   reordering can occur with Dual Connectivity where 2 or more radio
   frequency bands are combined on the RLC layer, this because there can
   be a time skew of a few milliseconds over transport links between the
   PDCP layer and the RLC layer(s).

   The RLC layer does resequencing on the RLC layer in LTE systems.  On
   5G systems however, resequencing is left to the PDCP layer.
   Resequencing on the PDCP layer is however optional according to the
   5G standard but is mostly enabled out of concern for sensitivity to
   packet reordering on the transport and application layer.

   In addition radio bearers with robust header compression (RoHC)
   should enable resequencing.

5.2.  Wi-Fi

   The IEEE 802.11 specification (Wi-Fi) currently supports only in-
   order delivery.  The 802.11 protocols inherit traffic delivery
   requirements from the 802.1Q specification (see section 6.5.3 in
   802.1Q), which only permits only in-order delivery.

   To utilize the medium efficiently, the 802.11 MAC aggregates data
   frames of a given traffic identifier (TID) and transmits them as a
   block.  However, due to link errors, not all frames in the block may
   be received.  A re-order buffer at the receiver holds up delivery of
   data frames if a frame ahead of it is missing.  A separate reorder
   buffer is maintained for each of the 8 TIDs.  A later retransmission
   may deliver the missing frame at which point the missing frame and
   subsequent frames are delivered.

   The process of in-order delivery is also taken advantage of as part
   of the security protocol.  Each data frame is sequentially numbered
   with a packet number.  To mitigate against a replay attack, the
   receiving MAC simply checks if the packet number of a received data
   frames is higher than the highest received one for that TID.

   Allowing out-of-order delivery within the 802.11 specification for a
   given TID would require some adjustments to the 802.11 protocol.
   Some of the adjustments include the following:

   *  The reorder buffer would need to release packets without waiting
      for older packets to be received.

   *  The replay detection mechanism would need to be updated to not
      drop an older missing frame when it is successfully retransmitted.

5.3.  DOCSIS

   The Data-Over-Cable Service Interface Specifications provide
   broadband access over hybrid fiber-coaxial networks.  The DOCSIS
   protocol does not support layer 2 retransmissions, but since the
   introduction of "channel bonding" functionality (a form of multi-link
   aggregation) in DOCSIS 3.0 in 2006, reordering can occur due to
   differences in capacity or latency between the bonded channels.  All
   equipment built to that and later versions of DOCSIS (including
   DOCSIS 3.1 and DOCSIS 4.0) is required to support specific
   resequencing features to guarantee in-order delivery.

   In the downstream direction (i.e. from the network to end-user)
   individual IP packets are encapsulated in layer 2 frames that
   generally include a 20-bit Downstream Service ID (DSID), a 1-bit
   Sequence Change Count, and a 16-bit Packet Sequence Number.  The
   specifications include detailed, manadatory, requirements on the
   handling of these fields, including a requirement that cable modems
   support at least 16 simultaneous resequencing contexts, each of which
   having sufficient memory to hold packets for up to 13 ms (18 ms in
   older equipment) at the maximum forwarding rate of the device,
   mechanisms for rapid loss detection, and significant management and
   configuration mechanisms to support the feature.

   In the upstream direction (i.e. from the end-user to the network)
   individual IP packets are encapsulated in layer 2 frames, then
   concatenated together and fragmented into "segments" for
   transmission.  The segment boundaries are determined by the size of
   the transmission opportunities (grants) and generally do not relate
   to the internal frame or packet boundaries.  So, in general a segment
   could begin with the tail of one L2 frame, then have zero or more
   full L2 frames, then the head of a final frame.  Each segment has a
   segment header which contains a 13-bit sequence number.  The CMTS is
   required to reassemble the concatenated frame sequence, and forward
   the individual frames in order.

6.  IANA Considerations

   This memo includes no request to IANA.

7.  Security Considerations

   This document should not affect the security of the Internet.

8.  References

8.1.  Informative References

   [RFC2401]  Kent, S. and R. Atkinson, "Security Architecture for the
              Internet Protocol", RFC 2401, DOI 10.17487/RFC2401,
              November 1998, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2401>.

   [RFC2661]  Townsley, W., Valencia, A., Rubens, A., Pall, G., Zorn,
              G., and B. Palter, "Layer Two Tunneling Protocol "L2TP"",
              RFC 2661, DOI 10.17487/RFC2661, August 1999,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2661>.

   [RFC2983]  Black, D., "Differentiated Services and Tunnels",
              RFC 2983, DOI 10.17487/RFC2983, October 2000,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2983>.

   [RFC3095]  Bormann, C., Burmeister, C., Degermark, M., Fukushima, H.,
              Hannu, H., Jonsson, L., Hakenberg, R., Koren, T., Le, K.,
              Liu, Z., Martensson, A., Miyazaki, A., Svanbro, K.,
              Wiebke, T., Yoshimura, T., and H. Zheng, "RObust Header
              Compression (ROHC): Framework and four profiles: RTP, UDP,
              ESP, and uncompressed", RFC 3095, DOI 10.17487/RFC3095,
              July 2001, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc3095>.

   [RFC3819]  Karn, P., Ed., Bormann, C., Fairhurst, G., Grossman, D.,
              Ludwig, R., Mahdavi, J., Montenegro, G., Touch, J., and L.
              Wood, "Advice for Internet Subnetwork Designers", BCP 89,
              RFC 3819, DOI 10.17487/RFC3819, July 2004,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc3819>.

   [RFC4224]  Pelletier, G., Jonsson, L., and K. Sandlund, "RObust
              Header Compression (ROHC): ROHC over Channels That Can
              Reorder Packets", RFC 4224, DOI 10.17487/RFC4224, January
              2006, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc4224>.

   [RFC5225]  Pelletier, G. and K. Sandlund, "RObust Header Compression
              Version 2 (ROHCv2): Profiles for RTP, UDP, IP, ESP and
              UDP-Lite", RFC 5225, DOI 10.17487/RFC5225, April 2008,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc5225>.

   [RFC8985]  Cheng, Y., Cardwell, N., Dukkipati, N., and P. Jha, "The
              RACK-TLP Loss Detection Algorithm for TCP", RFC 8985,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC8985, February 2021,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8985>.

   [RFC9002]  Iyengar, J., Ed. and I. Swett, Ed., "QUIC Loss Detection
              and Congestion Control", RFC 9002, DOI 10.17487/RFC9002,
              May 2021, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc9002>.

   [RFC2581]  Allman, M., Paxson, V., and W. Stevens, "TCP Congestion
              Control", RFC 2581, DOI 10.17487/RFC2581, April 1999,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2581>.

   [RFC3517]  Blanton, E., Allman, M., Fall, K., and L. Wang, "A
              Conservative Selective Acknowledgment (SACK)-based Loss
              Recovery Algorithm for TCP", RFC 3517,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC3517, April 2003,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc3517>.

   [RFC5681]  Allman, M., Paxson, V., and E. Blanton, "TCP Congestion
              Control", RFC 5681, DOI 10.17487/RFC5681, September 2009,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc5681>.

   [RFC6675]  Blanton, E., Allman, M., Wang, L., Jarvinen, I., Kojo, M.,
              and Y. Nishida, "A Conservative Loss Recovery Algorithm
              Based on Selective Acknowledgment (SACK) for TCP",
              RFC 6675, DOI 10.17487/RFC6675, August 2012,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc6675>.

Acknowledgements


Contributors

   Thanks to all of the contributors.

Authors' Addresses

   Greg White
   CableLabs
   United States of America
   Email: g.white@cablelabs.com


   Ingemar Johansson
   Ericsson
   Sweden
   Email: ingemar.s.johansson@ericsson.com


   Dibakar Das
   Intel
   United States of America
   Email: dibakar.das@intel.com
